Create diagnosticsource-getting-started.md (#29255)
dotnet/docs: docs/core/diagnostics/diagnosticsource-instrumentation-consumption.md

---
title: Instrument Code to Create DiagnosticSource Events and Consume Data with DiagnosticListener
description: A tutorial for instrumenting code with DiagnosticSource and consuming data with DiagnosticListener
ms.date: 05/02/2022
---
# Instrument Code to Create DiagnosticSource Events and Consume Data with DiagnosticListener

**This article applies to: ✔️** .NET Core 3.1 and later versions **✔️** .NET Framework 4.5 and later versions

This walkthrough shows how to instrument code with <xref:System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource?displayProperty=nameWithType>.
It then moves on to explain how <xref:System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource?displayProperty=nameWithType> consumes the data by first
finding the specified DiagnosticListeners one is interested in, subscribing to them, and decoding payloads for more specific data.
It finishes by describing filtering, which controls which events pass through the system.

-------------------------------------------

## Instrumenting with DiagnosticSource/DiagnosticListener

> We show how to instrument DiagnosticListener using the DiagnosticListener we made in the [Getting Started Guide](/docs/core/diagnostics/diagnosticsource-getting-started).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We show how to instrument DiagnosticListener using the DiagnosticListener we made in the [Getting Started Guide](/docs/core/diagnostics/diagnosticsource-getting-started.md).
```

The `DiagnosticSource` logging
interface consists of two methods:

```C#
    bool IsEnabled(string name)
    void Write(string name, object value);
```

A typical call site will look like:

```C#
    if (httpLogger.IsEnabled("RequestStart"))
        httpLogger.Write("RequestStart", new { Url="http://clr", Request=aRequest });
```

Architectural elements shown in the above code are as follows.
Every event has a `string` name (e.g. `RequestStart`), and exactly one `object` as a payload.
If you need to send more than one item, you can do so by creating an `object` with all information

> in it as properties. C#'s [anonymous type](https://msdn.microsoft.com/library/bb397696.aspx)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in it as properties. C#'s [anonymous type](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/fundamentals/types/anonymous-types)
```
Or is there a linkage in-between the docs that suits better?
The MSDN link is outdated.

convenient. At the instrumentation site, you must guard the call to `Write()` with an `IsEnabled()` check on
the same event name. Without this check, even when the instrumentation is inactive, the rules
of the C# language require all the work of creating the payload `object` and calling `Write()` to be
done, even though nothing is actually listening for the data. By guarding the `Write()` call, we
make it efficient when the source is not enabled.

-------------------------------------------

## Consuming Data with DiagnosticListener

Up until now, this guide has focused on how to instrument code to generate logging
information. In this section we focus on subscribing and decoding of that information.

### Discovery of DiagnosticListeners

The first step in receiving events is to discover which `DiagnosticListeners` you are
interested in. `DiagnosticListener` supports a way of discovering `DiagnosticListeners` that are
active in the system at runtime. The API to accomplish this is the `AllListeners`
`IObservable<DiagnosticListener>`.

The `IObservable` interface is the 'callback' version of the `IEnumerable` interface. You can learn

> more about it at the [Reactive Extensions](https://msdn.microsoft.com/data/gg577609.aspx) site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
more about it at the [Reactive Extensions](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/previous-versions/dotnet/reactive-extensions/hh242985) site.
```
Same here.

    static class PropertyExtensions
    {
        static object GetProperty(this object _this, string propertyName)
        {
            return _this.GetType().GetTypeInfo().GetDeclaredProperty(propertyName)?.GetValue(_this);
        }
    }
```

The `listener.Subscribe()` call above could be replaced with the following code, to decode the payload more fully.

```C#
    networkSubscription = listener.Subscribe(delegate(KeyValuePair<string, object> evnt) {
        var eventName = evnt.Key;
        var payload = evnt.Value;
        if (eventName == "RequestStart")
        {
            var url = payload.GetProperty("Url") as string;
            var request = payload.GetProperty("Request");
            Console.WriteLine("Got RequestStart with URL {0} and Request {1}", url, request);
        }
    });
```

Note that using reflection is relatively expensive. However, using reflection is the only
option if the payloads were generated using anonymous types. This overhead can be reduced by
making fast, specialized property fetchers either using `PropertyInfo.CreateDelegate` or
`ReflectEmit`, but that is beyond the scope of this document.

> (See the [PropertySpec](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/main/src/libraries/System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource/src/System/Diagnostics/DiagnosticSourceEventSource.cs#L784)

Reviewer: This links points anywhere in that file: 
![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5755834/166887943-bcd59810-55cb-45c7-a5f6-a2d7d5dfdca3.png)

Instead of _main_-branch this should refer to a commit-hash, so the link doesn't get outdated with each update on that file.

Author: @noahfalk where should this link be linked to?

Reviewer 2: This is probably the reference that was intended: https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/blob/6de7147b9266d7730b0d73ba67632b0c198cb11e/src/libraries/System.Diagnostics.DiagnosticSource/src/System/Diagnostics/DiagnosticSourceEventSource.cs#L1235
